https://www.ebi.ac.uk/europepmc/webservices/rest/PMC11369214/fullTextXML
Most Plasmodium vivax infections contain genetically distinct parasites, but the consequences of this polyclonality on the development of asexual parasites, their sexual differentiation, and their transmission remain unknown. We describe infections of Saimiri monkeys with two strains of P. vivax and the analyses of 80,024 parasites characterized by single cell RNA sequencing and individually genotyped. In our model, consecutive inoculations fail to establish polyclonal infections. By contrast, simultaneous inoculations of two strains lead to sustained polyclonal infections, although without detectable differences in parasite regulation or sexual commitment. Analyses of sporozoites dissected from mosquitoes fed on coinfected monkeys show that all genotypes are successfully transmitted to mosquitoes. However, after sporozoite inoculation, not all genotypes contribute to the subsequent blood infections, highlighting an important bottleneck during pre-erythrocytic development. Overall, these studies provide new insights on the mechanisms regulating the establishment of polyclonal P. vivax infections and their consequences for disease transmission.

P. vivax differs from P. falciparum in several key biological features that negatively impact our ability to control and eliminate vivax malaria. These idiosyncrasies include a greater genetic diversity4–8, a typically lower parasitemia9–11, an earlier appearance of gametocytes during the course of an infection11,12, and a dormant liver-stage, that can cause relapses months or years after an initial infection1–3,13,14. In addition, genetic analyses of infected patients have shown that most P. vivax blood infections are polyclonal and that patients are typically infected with several related or unrelated parasite genotypes5–8,13,15–18. The simultaneous presence of multiple parasites in one infection could complicate efficient control or clearance of the infection by the host immune response (especially if immunity is strain-specific) but may also influence the regulation of the parasites themselves. Distinct Plasmodium parasites present in the same host might alter their respective regulation to compete more efficiently for scarce resources or modify their sexual commitment to improve transmission and outcrossing19–22, similar to the well-known mating type regulation in yeast or the mechanisms limiting self-fertilization in plants. In this regard, it is important to note that sexual commitment is, at least partially, determined by environmental factors23–28, supporting the hypothesis that the parasites are able to sense their environment to modify their asexual development and sexual differentiation.

Once the parasitemia reached ~0.1%, and at regular intervals afterwards, we collected blood from each animal (Fig. 1A and Supplemental Fig. 2) and prepared 10X Genomics 3’ end scRNA-seq libraries after enrichment of parasitized RBCs using MACS columns. Overall, we prepared 24 single-cell RNA-sequencing libraries from blood samples and eight libraries from dissected salivary glands of infected mosquitoes, and generated 122,578,812 – 311,727,931 sequencing reads from each library (Supplemental Data 1).

From the blood sample libraries, 23,953,801 - 173,969,055 unique reads mapped to the P. vivax genome (37–87%) and 12–82% of those mapped to an annotated P. vivax gene39(Supplemental Data 1). Overall, we obtained a total of 80,024 individual cells, each characterized by at least 1000 unique reads mapped to annotated genes (Table 1).

To assign each individual cell characterized by scRNA-seq to a specific developmental stage, we clustered the cells using principal component analysis (PCA) and uniform manifold approximation and projection (UMAP), and calculated a pseudotime for asexual and sexual stages, separately, based on each cell PC coordinates (Fig. 1B and Supplemental Fig. 3). Lowering the cutoff for defining individual cells to 250 reads mapped to annotated genes per cell increased the number of cells recovered to 256,935 and enabled recovering many ring stage parasites (Supplemental Fig. 4). However, this lower cutoff hampered accurate genotyping of the cells and differential expression analyses (see below) and we therefore focused for subsequent analyses on the 80,024 cells characterized by more than 1000 unique reads mapped to annotated genes.

A Experimental design showing, from top to bottom, mosquitoes fed on the blood of the animals simultaneously infected by NIH-1993-F3 and Chesson (at 17 and 30 dpi), inoculation of two additional animals with 13,000 sporozoites dissected from the salivary glands of 20 infected An. freeborni mosquitoes, and the timing of the blood collected for the generation of scRNA-seq data. B Genotyping of the sporozoites collected from the salivary glands of mosquitoes fed on the blood of simultaneously infected monkeys. The two panels show the number of NIH-1993-F3 alleles (y-axis) and Chesson alleles (x-axis) determined from the scRNA-seq reads for each sporozoite (red, blue and purple dots) from two pools of 20 mosquitoes (left An. stephensi, right An. feeborni, both from feeding using blood from 5164). Note that a large proportion of parasites (in purple) fall along the diagonal and represent sporozoites derived from the mating of a NIH-1993-F3 and Chesson gametocytes (outcrossed). C Genotyping of blood stage parasites from infections initiated by sporozoite inoculation. D The figure shows the proportion of blood-stage parasites determined to be female gametocytes (y-axis) for the NIH-1993-F3 parasites in mono-infections (red dots, animals 5550, 5142, and 5537; n = 4) and NIH-1993-F3 parasites from the infections initiated by sporozoite inoculation (purple dots, animals 5550 and 5570; n = 6). E Volcano plot showing differences in gene expression between NIH-1993-F3 early asexual parasites (Group A) derived from parasitized RBC inoculation (monoinfection) and those derived from inoculation of sporozoites. Blue dots represent genes with higher expression in parasites derived from blood-stage inoculation, red dots genes with higher expression in parasites derived from sporozoite inoculation. Differentially expressed Rhoptry associated genes are highlighted in boxes (FDR = 0.1).

We generated eight scRNA-seq libraries from P. vivax sporozoites dissected from either Anopheles stephensi or An. freeborni mosquitoes (Supplemental Data 1). Despite contamination with mosquito RNAs (comparable to previous studies, see e.g.,37), we obtained 209,323-2,901,437 unique reads mapped to the P. vivax genome (0.28-5.47% mapping) resulting in 102-4,665 single cells characterized by at least 100 reads within genes per library (Supplemental Data 1, Table 1). We genotyped each individual sporozoite as described above and, despite the lower quality of the data, observed three genotype groups (Fig. 4B): some sporozoites only carried NIH-1993-F3 alleles and derived from mating of a NIH-1993-F3 male gametocyte with a NIH-1993-F3 female gametocyte, some sporozoites only carried Chesson alleles and derived from mating of Chesson gametocytes, and some sporozoites carried a mixture of NIH-1993-F3 and Chesson alleles and derived from outcrossed mating of a NIH gametocyte with a Chesson gametocyte. We observed more NIH-1993-F3 than Chesson self-mated sporozoites, probably due to the higher proportion of female gametocytes produced by NIH-1993-F3 parasites compared to Chesson parasites, although the lack of information on male gametocytes precludes drawing definitive conclusions.

We infected two additional Saimiri boliviensis monkeys by inoculating them with ~13,000 sporozoites dissected from An. freeborni fed with blood from the animals simultaneously coinfected. Both monkeys developed a blood-stage infection detectable by microscopy 29 days post inoculation. We then collected blood from each monkey and prepared scRNA-seq libraries (Fig. 4A, Supplemental Data 1, Table 1). Interestingly, in both monkeys, genotyping of the parasites revealed that the blood-stage infections contained only two of the three genotype groups identified in sporozoites: blood-stage parasites carried either only NIH-1993-F3 alleles (resulting from NIH-1993-F3 self-mating) or an equal proportion of NIH-1993-F3 and Chesson alleles (resulting from outcrossing) but we did not detect any blood-stage parasites carrying only Chesson alleles (Fig. 4C). This observation was unexpected given that the Chesson strain, in monoclonal infections, is able to be transmitted from mosquitoes to Saimiri monkeys and to successfully complete its pre-erythrocytic development to produce blood-stage infections57. Several scenarios could explain this observation. First, the failure of Chesson transmission might simply be due to chance: although we failed to detect Chesson self-mated parasites in two independent monkey infections, it is possible that these parasites (that were less abundant than the NIH-1993-F3 self-mated and the outcrossed sporozoites) were lost stochastically due to a strong bottleneck in population size occurring during the pre-erythrocytic development (58, see also below): for example, if only ~5% of the sporozoites inoculated derived from Chesson self-mating (Fig. 4B) and only 10–15 hepatic schizonts led to the blood infection, it would not be unlikely to see no Chesson blood-stage parasites (p > 0.05). Second, this lack of Chesson parasites detection in the blood might be caused by a delay in their liver-stage development: the consecutive infection experiments (Fig. 2) showed that it was difficult for a second parasite to establish a robust infection once one parasite was already successfully infecting RBCs, and a slightly delayed liver maturation could therefore provide a significant disadvantage in intraerythrocytic development. Alternatively, it is possible that Chesson parasites more readily enter dormancy in the liver while the NIH-1993-F3 parasites disproportionally develop into active liver schizonts. Third, we do not know if all salivary gland sporozoites were fully mature and infectious and it is possible that the Chesson sporozoites detected in mosquitoes were not yet able to be transmitted to mosquitoes (if their maturation was slower than the NIH-1993-F3 or the outcrossed sporozoites). Finally, the sporozoites used for inoculation were different from those used for scRNA-seq and it is possible that the latter did not include Chesson self-mated sporozoites (although the animals used for blood feeding were the same, and parasitemia and strain proportion was roughly similar at the time of collection (Supplemental Figs. 2, 6). A repeated infection and follow up studies, for example a back-cross between Chesson and the outcrossed parasites, could help differentiating among these hypotheses and could potentially provide insights on the genetic loci underlying this observation (if any).

We then compared the NIH-1993-F3 blood-stage parasites resulting from sporozoite infections with the NIH-1993-F3 parasites resulting from infection by blood stage inoculation to determine if the route of infection had any effect on the parasite regulation and development. The proportion of sexual parasites was lower in infections initiated by sporozoite inoculation than in infections initiated by parasitized RBC (27% vs 47%) (Fig. 4D), which could reflect a delay in the initiation of the sexual stage commitment. Infected red blood cell inoculations contain all blood stages from the previous infection, including long-lived gametocytes and already-committed asexual parasites, while infections derived from liver schizonts need to initiate and progress through the entire gametocytogenesis process and might therefore need longer to reach the same gametocytemia (note however that in contrast to P. falciparum59, gametocytogenesis might start during liver development in P. vivax60). Finally, we compared the gene expression profiles of parasites from infections initiated with parasitized RBCs vs. sporozoites. In early asexual parasites (group A) 439 genes were differentially expressed, and 99 genes were differentially regulated in gametocytes (Supplemental Data 3). The results revealed many female gametocyte genes differentially expressed in asexual parasites, again likely reflecting the spurious effect of rare doublets including female gametocytes in the infections initiated by blood inoculations where they are more abundant. However, we also noted a unique transcriptional signature with at least eight rhoptry-associated proteins (RhopH2, RhopH3, RAMA and the rhoptry neck proteins 1, 3, 6, 11 and 12) showing higher expression in blood-initiated infections than in the sporozoite-initiated infections (Fig. 4E). This specific pattern of overexpression of genes involved in RBC invasion could reflect a gradual strengthening of the mechanisms of RBC invasion over time to optimize the parasite growth and intraerythrocytic development61.

Once the parasitemia became measurable, and at regular intervals throughout the course of the infection, we collected 1 ml of blood from each animal to prepare 10X Genomics 3’ end scRNA-seq libraries (for a total of 3-4 samples per animal) [Cat. No./ID 1000268]. 50 µl of whole blood was diluted 1:10 in trizol and stored for later analyses. The remaining blood cells were transferred to 50 mL tubes containing RPMI 1640 to a final 0.5% to 1.0% hematocrit solution. Parasitized cells were enriched using MACS LS separation columns. Enriched cells were quantified by Millipore Scepter 3.0 Handheld Automated Cell Counter. From each sample, we then loaded an estimated 5000 cells on a 10X Chromium controller. Libraries were completed according to the manufacturer’s instructions and sequenced on an Illumina NovaSeq to generate 200 million read pairs per sample.

Two blood samples from two additional Saimiri boliviensis monkeys coinfected with one NIH-1993-F338 and the Chesson P. vivax clones were used for membrane feeding of Anopheles stephensi and Anopheles freeborni. Salivary glands sporozoites were collected from each feeding at 17–21 days post-feed: eight groups of 20 female mosquitoes, each from a separate feed, were anesthetized on ice and their salivary glands dissected in PBS under a stereomicroscope. The salivary glands were transferred to a low-retention tube (Protein LoBind Tube; Eppendorf) containing PBS, homogenized with a disposable pestle, spun down, washed, resuspended, and quantified.

10X scRNA-seq data were first demultiplexed using custom scripts and all reads mapped to P. vivax P01 v54 reference65 using Hisat266 with the maximum intron length set to 5000 bp. We then used custom scripts to count the number of reads per cell, only considering reads that mapped within genes, using the annotations generated in39. For the blood-stage parasites, we only considered single cell transcriptomes characterized by at least 1000 unique reads mapped within annotated genes, and 100 unique reads mapped within annotated genes for the sporozoites to account for host RNA contamination (the data for blood-stage parasites using the 250 reads cutoff is presented in supplemental information). Count tables were generated via custom scripts and exported to SCRAN for further analysis67. Asexual and female gametocytes were identified based on UMAP clusters and expression of selected marker genes. We then calculated pseudotime for each cell, separately for the asexual parasites and female gametocytes, by calculating the Euclidean distance in the principal component space from an arbitrarily chosen origin.

All sequence data generated in this study have been deposited in the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) Sequence Read Archive under the BioProject ID PRJNA1047651 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sra?linkname=bioproject_sra_all&from_uid=1047651). Source Data are provided with this paper, including single cell count table and processed data generated, available through Zenodo (https://zenodo.org/records/12775216).

Custom scripts are available at https://github.com/bhazzard11/Coinfection_Analysis and https://zenodo.org/records/12775129.

All sequence data generated in this study have been deposited in the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) Sequence Read Archive under the BioProject ID PRJNA1047651 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sra?linkname=bioproject_sra_all&from_uid=1047651). Source Data are provided with this paper, including single cell count table and processed data generated, available through Zenodo (https://zenodo.org/records/12775216).

Custom scripts are available at https://github.com/bhazzard11/Coinfection_Analysis and https://zenodo.org/records/12775129.
